ID: SSC-BACT-0001
Author: Sebastian S. Cocioba
Title: Colony PCR
Description: Colony PCR from Liquid Mini Cultures
1. Prepare 50mL of LB sterile LB Broth with the same antibiotic used to select the desired colony plate. For ampcilillin, final conc. should be 100mg/L. For kanamycin, the final concentration should be 50mg/L.
2. Under aseptic conditions, prepare five sterile 1.5mL tubes labeled 1,2,3,4, and NC. Fill each tube with 200uL of the LB Broth prepared in step 1. Cap the "NC" tube as this will be your negative control and sterility check for the media. 
3. Select four well isolated colonies from the petri dish. Try to select ones with clearly defined edges, away from others, and larger than the tip of toothpick or pipette. Using a sterile toothpick or pipette tip, pick up one colony into each of the remaining uncapped tubes marked with a number. Be sure to poke cleanly into the colony and visually inspect if possible that some cell residue is present on the tip. Be sure not to add cells to the tube marked "NC" as we want this to remain clear and give us a reference to monitor cell growth visually.
4. Shake these tubes in 37C incubator shaker for 4 hours. I let them simply rattle around in a small box whose insides is layered with a paper towel to dampen impacts and reduce noise. This is an optional and rather posh add-on but do ensure the tubes are freely rattling about in the box and that the box is secure enough to not go flying off the orbital platform.
5. After the cells have shaken for 4 hours and are visibly cloudier when compared to the negative control tube, take them out of the incubator and leave them at room temp for now. We will use them shortly.
6. Pre-heat a PCR machine to 95C. I prepare my PCR machine such that the first step is an infinite hold at 95C which I need to skip into the normal PCR program once the tubes make contact with the PCR block. I do this to not let the cells go at the PCR master mix's dNTPs and/or let the reaction slowly reach denaturing temps. My routine PCR program using NEB Taq 5x Master Mix in a 50uL reaction volume is as follows: intial denaturation 95C 1min, cycle denaturation 95C 30sec, annealing 68C 30sec, extension 72C 30sec (1kb per bp, my detection PCR targets are ~500bp), and a final extension 72C 5minutes. This goes on for 30 cycles. As mentioned prior, I add a "hold at 95C forever" step right before the main PCR step which my device allows me to skip over mid-run. Your device may not be able to do this so just set it to hold at 95C and preload the program right before your tubes need to hit the block and start thermocycling.
7. To a 1.5mL tube, add 216uL DH2O (36uL/rxn; one extra rxn for pipetting error), 6uL of forward primer working stock, 6uL of reverse primer working stock, vortex, place on ice.
8. To 5 PCR tubes, label 1,2,3,4,and +. Add 2uL of each colony culture into its corresponding tube. To the "+", add 2uL of diluted plasmid DNA from a plasmid carrying the DNA insert you used in your cloning run. To dilute, add 2uL of miniprep to a 1.5mL tube contianing 198uL of sterile DH2O. Vortex, label, and use 2uL of this as the positive control tube in your PCR reaction.
9. Add 60uL of NEB Taq 5x master mix to the tube containing primers and water. This mix is now ready to distribute. Keep on ice and try to dispense as soon as possible.
10. Dispense 48uL of the completed master mix of step 6 to each of the PCR reaction tubes. Start with the positive control tube and use a new tip for each PCR tube. DO NOT CROSS CONTAMINATE SAMPLES! Vortex, and place into pre-heated PCR machine. Skip the infinite hold step if applicable and run the protocol as described in step 6 immadiately. This will take about 1hr30mins to complete.
11. While the PCR reaction is cycling, prepare an agarose gel by dissolving 1.5g of agarose into 150mL of 1x TAE Running buffer. Melt in microwave until crystal clear and then dispense the amount needed to pour one gel enough to fit 5 samples plus ladder. Using my gel rig, I need 25mL for a small gel. I found that using a 50mL centrifuge tube works well. Add the GelGreen DNA stain to the molten at 1uL per 50mL of gel. The GelGreen is 10,000x concentrated but this amount seems to be fine for my gel transilluminator. Pour the molten agarose into the casting tray in a back and forth motion to stir the DNA stain into the molten gel. Allow gel to cast and set for at least 20 minutes. Store gel away from direct sunlight if possible.
12. Once PCR reaction finishes, remove the tubes from the PCR machine, stop the PCR program, and return to your bench. Add 10uL of DNA Loading Dye (I use Purple Loading Dye from NEB) to each tube, using a new pipette tip for each loading dye dispensation to avoid cross contaminating the tubes. Vortex the tubes briefly to mix the dye.
13. Obtain your desired DNA ladder from the fridge (I use NEB 1KB Plus). Place your now-set agarose gel into the electrophoresis tank and cover with 1x TAE running buffer or your desired running buffer as described by your gelbox manufacturer. Dispense half the typical volume into the leftmost well of your gel. For my gel rig, I typically load 20uL cloning volumes, 10uL PCR reactions, and 5uL ladder volumes and get reliably good looking gels.
14. Quickly as to not let the ladder DNA diffuse, add the colony PCR smaples to the wells using tube #1 as the first lane after the ladder and finish with the positive control. USE NEW TIPS FOR EACH LANE LOADING TO AVOID CROSS CONTAMINATION.
15. Place the protective plastic cover over your electrophoresis tank and start the process. Typically these gels run at 100v and take about 20minutes to migrate to a reasonable length of gel. Conventionally it's best to stop the gel electrophoresis run when the loaidng dye front is 4/5ths of the distance down the length of the gel.
16. Visualize the gel under a transilluminator. If using a UV light, please wear propper face shield to avoid eye damage. Ideally only work with blue light excitable DNA stains like GelGreen and safe blue light transilluminators like those using LEDs of 470nm wavelength. Observe if bands in colony lanes batch the positive control. Use the PCR verified colony cultures for downstream processing and anaylsis.

