1. Autoclave 500mL of distilled water, tweezers, #11 scalpel handles, self-healing cutting mat and cotton makeup remover pads and place them in laminar flow hood to cool off.
2. Under laminar flow, remove a 10mm leaf from sterile culture and place it onto the cutting mat abaxially (bottom side up; lighter green).
3. With a sterile 6mm biopsy punch, cut leaf disks to the left and right of the mid-rib. Ensure the punch has a complete circle's worth of leaf before you press down to make the cut. Place the first 12 disks onto MSBN media; these will act as your negative control disks whcih will not be exposed to agrobacterium.
4. Place the remaining leaf disks into 25mL of MSL containing Agrobacterium tumefaciens cells carrying your plasmid of interest. Cut out at least 40 leaf disks per experiment.
5. Cap the sterile 50mL tube containing your leaf disks and agro cells and place the tube on its side and incubate for 20 minutes at room temp.
6. Prepare 3 MSBN plates without herbicides or antibiotics while you wait for agro to do it's thing.
7. Under laminar flow, open the 50mL agro tube and place it on a rack vertically. Using sterile tweezers, carefully lift out leaf disks, one at a time, dab them onto the sterile cotton makeup remover pad to remove excess bacterial culture, and plate them abaxially (light green bottom side up); 12 leaf disks per MSBN plate. Seal the dishes with parafilm or snap them shut if self-sealing.
8. Orient the plates along wiht the negative control plate into an inverted vertitcal stack, wrap the stack in aluminum foil, and incubate them in the dark (drawer, box, etc) at room temp for 48 hours or until distinct halos of bacteria form around each leaf disk. This plate is now a co-culture of tobacco and agrobacterium.
9. Remove the aluminum foil and check on the leaf disks. If the bacterial halo is clearly visible, proceed with the next step. If the halos are not distinct (clearly visible contiguous ring of microbes) then incubate another 8-12 hours and reinspect.
10. Transfer the negative control leaf disks onto 6 MSBNKC plates, two disks per dish, and orient them as a pair close to the edge of the disk. Using a permanent marker, draw an arc around the negative control disks to mark off the boundry line between the experimental leaf disks and the negative control disks. Do not touch the encircled tissue with agrobacterium or utensiles used with agrobacterium.
11. Transfer the co-cultured leaf disks onto each of the six MSBNKC plates carefully avoiding the boundry line between negative control leaf tissue and your experimental ones. DO NOT TOUCH AGRO TWEEZERS TO NEG CONTROL DISKS!!!
12. Once transfered, tuck the leaf disks into the media such that the make clear contact on all sides of the tissue with the media. Imagine making a wall of jello around the plants about 2mm tall. This step also ensures the agrobacteirum biofilm is broken up as much as possible to allow for effective antibiotic removal of the agrobacterium by the cefotaxime.
13. Parafilm the dishes, label them with today's date, medium name, agro strain, plasmid name and incubate them under 16hr days.
14. On the 2 week mark, transfer the explants into 2oz contiment cups (polypropylene) containing MSBNKC agar filled to the half-way mark. Isolate one explant condiment cup, leave behind any that either do not show a visual marker or have not produced calluse-like tissue. These are likely not going to regenerate.
15. Seal the cups with another empty sterile condiment cup and a thin strip of parafilm (2 square strip cut into thirds). Label, date, and incubate these cups under 16hr days.
16. At the 4 week mark (two weeks since the replate), prepare MSNCK media (lacking BAP; rooting media) at enough volume for at least six condiment cups; make more cups if you think there are more than six shoots to isolate.
17. Under laminar flow, open one condiment cup that you determine to have shoots mature enough for rooting. These are ideally 10mm tall with a distinct stem and leaves. This is not the most likely shoot and some experience is necessary. In general, look for any shoot that has a stem along with leaves. Avoid shoots that are just leaves as those will not root. If you're in doubt, place the suspected shoot onto rooting hormone anyway as there may still be a chance.
18. Cap the rooting media cultures with another sterile empty condiment cup, seal with parafilm, and incubate under 16hr days until clearly visible roots appear. This step can take as long as necessary but do be aware that the antibiotics in the medium will fade and an agrobacterium resurgance is always possible.
19. Fill a specially designated (marked not for food use; considered as lab equipment form now on) large tupperware container (shoebox) with warm tap water at the temperature one would wash a baby in. Carefully remove the upper lid of the condiment cup culture capsules, and submerge the media cups in the tap water. With gloved hands, carefully remove the agar from the roots of each plant, paying close attention to the thicker roots as their hairs trap agar. Be gentle and consider it best to undergroom than overgroom these roots.   
20. Prepare damp well draining potting soil in 2" pots (4" if you can spare the space) and fill to the top generously. With a gloved hand, place your index finger into the soil half way down. Place the root-side of the plant into the hole and bury it to the crown or a bit above. Repeat for all remaining plants.
21. Prepare large transparent shoe box tupperware boxes by drilling holes into the walls and floor of the top of each box pair, leave the bottom boxes intact. I use 24 evenly spaced holes along the walls and floor. Tape these holes with a pull dab. Label each pair of opposite holes with a number. This number will signify the days since this box was sealed.
22. Place the plants in the bottom shoebox section, spray with tap water, add 25mm or so of water to the bottom box, and place the top box on as a cover. Ensure all the tape tabs are intact and in place. Using packaging tape, seal the rims of the two boxes together forming the plant acclimatization chamber. Ensure an air-tight seal, press firmly at the edges.
23. Place the acclimatization chamber under 16hr days and remove a tape tab pair for each day the plants remain in this chamber. Once all the tabs are removed, take the lid entirely off the chamber and move the plants into greenhouse conditions. Autoclave any soil that made contact with the recovered plants. Bleach the pots and utensiles used during repotting.
24. Label each plant with their emergence day, plant id initials or full plant name, plasmid name, and agro strain name. Separated these plants from the rest of your greenhouse and ensure they do not grow by a window as pollen from flowers will also be transgenic. Autoclave any plant debris at all stages of plant growth.
25. When at least two new leaves have grown since emergence day, make a leaf punch PCR experiment to test for transgene presence. Only grow PCR positive plants or ones that clearly show visual marker.
26. Wait until plant sets seed. When at least 20% of your flower pods have begun to turn brown, stop watering the plant, place a brown paper bag over the mature bud bundle and staple the bottom of the bag to seal the flower bud bundle inside the bag.
27. Once the soil completely dry and plant has either deeply yellowed or dried entirely, cut off the flower bloom, harvest seeds, label seep packets (paper coin envelopes) with date of experiment start and date of harvest along with agro line, plasmid name and plant name. Finally write your nanme on it; congratulations!
28. Surface sterilize the seeds as you did when you started the initial seeds before this experiment and plate them onto MSBNK media and allow plantlets to germinate. Tabulate data on germinated plants vs dead seeds and if a visual marker is used, how many plants have germinated and show phenotype.
